---
title: "Women's mental health is the cornerstone of progress "
description: "Explore the vital role of women's mental health in fostering societal progress. Discover insights on overcoming challenges, celebrating individuality, and the importance of empowerment. Join the conversation on nurturing a supportive environment for women's well-being. #WomensHealth #Empowerment #SocietalProgress"
date: 2024-03-19T05:00:00Z
image: "https://miro.medium.com/v2/resize:fit:1348/format:webp/1*UedtIWle87K7eG2_OaOE6A.jpeg"
categories: ["Mental Health"]
authors: ["Pierre Ntango"]
tags: ["Youth", "Life"]
draft: false

---
As we embrace the spirit of Women's Month, I reached out to a dear friend for her perspective on this significant observance. She generously provided her insights via an audio message, emphasizing an aspect of women's lives that demands our attention yet often remains in the shadows: mental health. Her powerful message has been transcribed here to underscore the theme we are championing this year: "Invest in Women: Accelerate Progress."

#### Elevating society through women's mental health
The focus on women's mental health is not just about recognizing individual well-being, it is also an acknowledgment of its pivotal role in driving societal progress. During Women's Month, we celebrate the extraordinary accomplishments of women and the breaking of historical barriers. At the same time, we must acknowledge the underlying factor that enables these successes: women’s mental and emotional strength. The insights from my friend's audio message illuminate the often-unspoken challenges that women endure, intensified by societal demands, cultural expectations, and their complex roles they play in our communities.

#### Understanding the ripple effect of a woman under pressure
The World Health Organization (WHO, 2023 https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/depression) reports that depression affects women 50 percent more than men, shedding light on a pervasive issue. This disparity is not surprising when we consider the heavy burdens women carry from a young age. 

Societal norms often dictate a woman's role and set specific expectations that can lead to significant stress. Family members persistently questioning a woman's marital status adds a personal layer of pressure as she reaches a certain age.

In the workplace, women work hard to build successful careers or businesses and make meaningful contributions to society. At the same time, they are expected to balance these achievements with societal pressures to maintain an ideal home and family life, fulfilling the roles of perfect wives and mothers.

Although these pressures may not inherently be negative, they can become overwhelming in the absence of proper support. A woman's mental health significantly impacts her immediate surroundings. When she feels stressed, it is not only her well-being that suffers; her home's stability, her partner's happiness, and her children's welfare are all at risk. 

Women are frequently seen as the pillars of their families and, by extension, society. Therefore, their mental health is integral to the well-being of the community. My friend’s observation:  "When a woman is not okay, her world crumbles," poignantly illustrates the profound effect that stress can have on women, underscoring the importance of investing in women's mental health as both essential and beneficial.

#### Shifting the focus from expectations to empowerment 
Instead of confining women to traditional roles, we should empower them to define their own paths. This crucial shift moves us from rigid societal expectations to a place of empowerment and autonomy for women. It is about valuing and supporting women's unique strengths, ambitions, and well-being. Creating a supportive environment enables women to make choices that align with their personal and professional goals, contributing to their mental health and overall satisfaction. Empowerment involves equipping women with the necessary tools, opportunities, and networks to succeed on their own terms, breaking free from outdated norms. This not only uplifts individual women but also enhances the strength and diversity of our communities and society as a whole.

#### Celebrating choice and individuality
The narrative is indeed shifting, and it is inspiring to see. Women are actively debunking cultural myths that have long defined their worth and constrained their choices. They are boldly proclaiming their right to break from traditional molds—making choices like staying single, pursuing fulfilling careers, and defining themselves beyond their roles as partners or mothers. Emphasizing self-care and embracing spaces that align with their authentic selves are becoming the norm. Women are speaking their truths, setting healthy boundaries, and practicing self-compassion more openly than ever before.

The growing movement of women advocating for a new paradigm of individuality and self-care marks significant progress towards a culture of empowerment and self-discovery. It highlights the growing recognition of mental health's critical role in achieving personal and collective well-being. As more women voice their unique stories and truths, they pave the way for a more inclusive and understanding society where individual choices are celebrated, and mental health is prioritized. This movement champions both personal liberation and a collective march towards a society that is more empathetic and empowered. 

#### The bottom line
As we reflect on the theme of this year’s Women's Month, it is clear that the journey towards gender equality and empowerment is multifaceted, involving not just the celebration of achievements but also a deep understanding of the challenges women face, particularly in terms of mental health. The stories shared, the pressures acknowledged, and the burgeoning narrative of choice and individuality all point to a critical need: to support and invest in women's mental well-being.

This investment is not a mere act of charity but is a foundational step towards building a more resilient, innovative, and inclusive society. By recognizing the unique challenges women face and providing the necessary support structures, we not only uplift individual women but also strengthen our communities and society at large.

In closing, let us carry forward the spirit of Women's Month throughout the year. Let us commit to understanding, supporting, and empowering the women in our lives, in our workplaces, and in our communities. Together, we can create an environment where women's mental health is prioritized, their choices are celebrated, and their potential is fully realized. This is not just a call to action for Women's Month; it is a guiding principle for a more equitable and compassionate world.

### About the Author
Pierre Ntango, the Founder and Executive Director of HAZEYouth, transforms his personal challenges with substance abuse into a force for empowering the youth. His journey fuels the mission of HAZEYouth, which is to support the growth, creativity, and holistic well-being of young people.